JUDY WOODRUFF: But first: More
than three million migrant
workers every year, most of
them women, leave their
countries to work as domestic
laborers, often in conditions
some say border on slavery.
Human trafficking is especially
grave in the Persian Gulf
and the Middle East.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro begins his report
from the West African nation of
Cameroon.
It's part of his series
Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They're
able to laugh at it now in a
workshop setting, but the skit
these women are watching
depicts experiences
that are all too real.
These women are all survivors
from time spent in Persian
Gulf and Middle East countries
where they were domestic
workers, victims of an industry
the U.N. and rights groups
say is rife with human
trafficking and abuse.
Three years ago, Francisca
Awah was working as a secretary
in Cameroon and helping her
mother sell vegetables.
She had a new baby and
with her fiance wanted
to build a nest egg.
So, Awah, who has a college
degree, jumped at what she
thought was a teaching job offer
in Kuwait for 10 times
her salary in Cameroon.
She paid the sponsoring
agency $500, plus airfare.
But almost as soon as she landed
in Kuwait, she knew something
was wrong, an experience
familiar to many in
this audience and
acted out in the skit.
WOMAN: You no like, you
give me $6,000, you go
back to your country.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The bait and
switch, an agent or trafficker
demanding large sums if
they weren't satisfied with
their job or pay, in Francisca
Awah's case, not teaching, but
cleaning.
FRANCISCA AWAH, Trafficking
Survivor: He started telling me,
you're going to work with me as
a maid.
You will take care of my two
children and the house chores.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Awah says
she complained and asked for
her passport back, so she could
return home.
Although it's illegal, workers'
passports are routinely
confiscated by employers.
The employer's wife refused,
saying she had paid the agency
$2,000 for her services.
FRANCISCA AWAH: And the lady
was so angry that she pointed
at the television and told
me that, Francisca,
you know something?
You are like that television.
You are a commodity.
I bought you.
You need to pay back my
money before you leave.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
She had bought you?
FRANCISCA AWAH: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Then, one
day, Awah saw a news report
about an organization, Freedom
For All, headed by an American
woman named Katie Ford.
KATIE FORD, Freedom For All:
And she said, please help me.
There are many in
much worse situations.
Please help us all.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Indeed,
Awah's story is far from unique.
Each year, more than three
million women worldwide
are forced into servitude
as domestic workers.
Ford was shocked
when she learned the
extent of the problem.
KATIE FORD: Why aren't
we calling this slavery?
It's people being forced to
work without pay, without
an ability to escape.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Katie
Ford is the former CEO of the
renowned Ford Modeling Agency.
Her parents started the business
in 1946, and represented
such high profile models as
Elle Macpherson and Naomi
Campbell, bringing standards to
an industry notorious for taking
advantage of young women.
Ford was the first agency
to insist that models
be paid a fair wage.
KATIE FORD: They made sure
the client paid, and they made
sure the models were protected.
This is the first
picture of her I saw.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Just as her
parents did for their models,
Katie Ford says she wanted
to advocate for
domestic workers.
Her goal was to form
partnerships with
governments, employers and
human rights organizations.
One of the first places
she started was Kuwait,
an oil-rich state of
nearly four million people
where foreigners outnumber
native Kuwaitis by 2-1.
It is the only country in the
Persian Gulf region to even
acknowledge there's a problem
with domestic workers.
Kuwait became the first country
in the Gulf region to pass a
law that attempts to protect
the rights of domestic workers,
requiring at least one day
off a week, for example,
and setting the maximum number
of hours worked per week.
It's not much.
That maximum is 72 hours.
And the law doesn't specify
that the worker be allowed out
of the home on that day off.
And many, in fact, are forced
to remain in their employer's
home on their day off.
The Kuwait government has
established a shelter,
with a capacity for 500,
where foreign domestic
workers can escape
abusive employers.
We were given a rare tour
of the facility by its
director, Falah al Mutairi.
FALAH AL MUTAIRI, Shelter
Director (through translator):
The services that are provided
include legal services,
social, cultural and
emotional help if needed.
When it comes to deciding
what the next step is, it's
up to the individual herself.
Does she want to
stay in the country?
That's when we discuss options.
Ninety percent of the
women want to go back
to their home countries.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Since the
shelter opened two-and-a-half
years ago, nearly 8,000 women
have passed through, waiting
for passports to be returned,
trying to find the means to
buy return tickets, sorting
out various legal problems.
We spoke with five
women from countries as
diverse as Madagascar,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka,
Nepal and the Philippines.
All said they were either
unpaid or severely underpaid.
Many were lured here
under false pretenses.
Nineteen-year-old
Hassanatu Bangura says her
parents thought they were
sending her to college.
HASSANATU BANGURA, Trafficking
Survivor: I think I'm
going to start school.
So we go to the office, and she
said that I'm going to work.
BIBI NASSER AL SABAH, Social
Work Society of Kuwait: We
have a domestic labor law, but
we don't have clear punishments
or punishments that are enough
to make an employer stop.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Bibi
Al Sabah is a member of
Kuwait's ruling family.
Twelve years ago, she founded
an organization designed to
get workers legal help, also,
she says, to change the
culture, and attitudes
toward domestic workers.
BIBI NASSER AL SABAH: We're
rich people, and we can afford
to have people working for us.
And so, with this idea, a
lot of people eventually
just lost track of how
humans should behave.
It became part of the culture
now to have workers everywhere.
And so people forget that
they're humans and forget that
these people are -- have lives
and have children and
have their dignity.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Falah Al
Mutairi acknowledges that more
reforms need to happen, but he's
convinced that Kuwait
has turned a corner.
And he says that, to truly
eradicate the problem,
traffickers must be
held accountable in the
workers' countries.
FALAH AL MUTAIRI (through
translator): Because
of sovereignty issues,
Kuwait cannot track
down criminals in
other countries.
It can't do anything about
people outside its jurisdiction.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Francisca
Awah isn't sure she can stop
the traffickers either, but she
is trying to help the
desperate economic plight
of women in low-income
countries like Cameroon.
After being rescued by Katie
Ford 18 months ago, the two
women have teamed up to form
a career training
program for women in this
West African country
FRANCISCA AWAH: I wish
that the girls should be
like empowered personally.
They should learn to do
something within their country.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Last fall,
Awah led a workshop with 34
young women who fled abusive
work situations in
the Middle East.
They were learning how
to finance and start
their own businesses.
It included field trips to
restaurants and markets to
learn from other entrepreneurs
and team-building exercises.
WOMAN: You wake up.
You clean everywhere, OK?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Gatherings
like these have helped women
overcome, even laugh at
their traumatic experiences, and
maybe, they say, spread the word
to other would-be trafficking
victims.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
this is Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Kumba, Cameroon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told
Stories Project at the
University of St.
Thomas in Minnesota.